## Context in Islandora 8

[Context](https://www.drupal.org/project/context) is a Drupal contrib module that allows configuration of "if this, then that" logic using an administrative user interface. Context defines "conditions" and "reactions" to enact the "if this [condition], then that [reaction]" logic. Some Islandora 7.x repositories use the community-contributed [Islandora Context](https://github.com/SFULibrary/islandora_context) module to apply this sort of logic to Islandora objects. An example Context from Islandora 7.x is

> If an object's namespace is 'customnamespace', render the block containing the rights statement 'Please contact Special Collections before reusing this item'.

The Context project page on drupal.org says "You can think of each context as representing a 'section' of your site.", but that doesn't tell the whole story, since it gives the impression that Context is all about defining subsites. Context in Drupal 8 is much more powerful in Drupal 8 than in Drupal 7 due to how it interacts with the rest of Drupal (specifically, through Drupal 8's new plugin API). Because of this increased flexibility and power, and because Context provides a ready-made user interface for site administrators to combine conditions and reactions, Islandora 8 uses Context to drive the logic underlying important aspects of Islandora like generating derivatives and determining how objects are displayed. In Islandora 7, many of these things where hard-coded in solution packs and utility modules.

Most Islandora 8 repository administrators will not need to alter or configure the Contexts that perform these operations. But since objects in Islandora 8 are just Drupal nodes, Context can be used to do more things than it could be used for in Islandora 7. One important group of functionality in Islandora 8 repositories that admins might want to configure is what types of [media](datastreams.md) get persisted to Fedora. Unlike in Islandora 7.x, Islandora 8 allows administrators to choose what types of media get persisted to Fedora. For example, you may only want the "Preservation Master" and "Original File" media persisted to Feodra, and not "Thumbnails" or "Extracted Text". This is dertermined using Contexts.
