# 0.1.0 of the Starter Site

These release notes cover the Islandora Starter Site. You do not have to use the Islandora Starter Site to use Islandora. 

Full release notes can be found on [Github](https://github.com/Islandora-Devops/islandora-starter-site/releases). This page includes instructions for more complex changes.


## Using “View Mode Switcher” in the Starter Site

### Executive Summary:

“Display hints” field on nodes is now a View Mode Selection field on Media. ([Pull request](https://github.com/Islandora/islandora-starter-site/pull/39))

_This is a different method of configuring viewers. You do not need to change your existing site to do things differently, but this document explains what was added and what was removed, should you choose to._


### Rationale:

Uses a simpler selection mechanism to accomplish the same thing, but is easier to set up and debug.


### List of Changes:

* The **View Mode Switch** module was enabled.
* A View mode switch field for Media was created with the following settings:
    * overrides the view mode called “Source”
    * On File media type, allows selecting the “OpenSeadragon” or “PDFjs” view modes
    * On Image media type, allows selecting the “OpenSeadragon” view mode.
    * On Document media type, allows selecting the “PDFjs” view mode.

Note: the OpenSeadragon and PDFjs view modes on media had already been created, and configured appropriately (i.e. to show _just_ the file in the specified viewer), on the above media types.



* The “OpenSeadragon” and “PDFjs” EVA views were removed.
* The “OpenSeadragon”, “PDFjs”, and “Binary” view modes (on nodes) were removed.
* The “OpenSeadragon”, “PDFjs”, and “Binary” contexts were removed.
* The “Display Hints” field (on Repository Item) was removed.
* The “Islandora Display” taxonomy vocabulary was removed, and its entries removed from the Starter Site’s tags migration.


### Using this new method:

**Select the appropriate viewer (“PDFjs” or “OpenSeadragon”) in the “Display mode for viewer” field on the Service File media**. Then it will display in the desired viewer on its node.

This uses the existing “Service File EVA” view, which is already displaying on the “Default” view mode for Repository Item, and which will select an attached Media that is tagged “Service File”, and render it in that media’s “Source” view mode. With the View mode switcher, an alternate view mode can be rendered (such as PDF or Openseadragon) instead of the media type’s default viewer.

This is a departure from previous logic, where different files (service file or original file) would be shown based on the combination of Islandora Model and Display Hints. This makes it hard to determine which file is being displayed, or to diagnose why no file might be displayed.


### Changes to Content:

If you wish to display your Original File, such as a PDF, TIFF, or even an MP4, in a viewer to the user, you can _also_ tag it as a Service File. Informally, we’ve called this “double-tagging”.

Tagging a media with “Original File” and “Service File” will prevent a service file from being generated. **Note: Ensure that you have Islandora 2.6.1 or later, because a bug would cause an infinite loop of derivatives otherwise. **Normally, a derivative with the target tag of “Service file” (or any other) will overwrite the file if there is an existing media with that tag. As of 2.6.1 we check to make sure that the target tag is not already on the original media, and don’t request a derivative in that case.

To do bulk updates to content (e.g. to add the “Service File” and “PDFjs” terms to existing PDFs), create a view using the “Views Bulk Edit” feature.

If you are deleting fields (e.g. the existing Display Hint field), please record your values or transfer them to the new system first.


### Ingest

If **ingesting files manually**, and you want to display the Original File in a viewer, select “Original File” **and** “Service File” as you are creating the media. You can expect other derivatives (Thumbnail, FITS, Extracted Text, …) to proceed as normal.

If **ingesting files through Workbench**, you can set the `media_use_tid` either in your workbench config, or as a column in your spreadsheet. It may take multiple values. See `media_use_tid` in [https://mjordan.github.io/islandora_workbench_docs/configuration/#media-settings](https://mjordan.github.io/islandora_workbench_docs/configuration/#media-settings). Derivative behavior should be the same as when ingesting manually.


