# Islandora Architecture

At its core, Islandora is a [Drupal] website that leverages a suite of [Microservices]. To help illustrate this, different site operations are described below.

- The diagram under [Islandora is a Drupal Website](#islandora-is-a-drupal-website) describes how a typical web page is displayed when a site visitor arrives at an Islandora repository on the internet. How most HTML responses are generated for Islandora sites are identical to any Drupal website that integrates with [Solr]. The exception being Islandora's [IIIF] integration, which is explained in a bit more detail in [IIIF Integration](#iiif-integration)
- The diagrams under [Microservices](#microservices) explain how events are emitted from an Islandora Drupal website and processed by Islandora's event driven architecture
- [Components](#components) is a list of software used in the Islandora tech stack

## Islandora is a Drupal Website

When a client visits an Islandora website, the request flow looks like a typical [Drupal] request.
The request is received by [NGINX], which forwards the request to [Drupal].
Drupal bootstraps and queries [MariaDB] to generate an HTML response.
If the request was for a search page, Drupal may also query [Solr] to include search results in the HTML response.

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    user([Client / Browser])
    user e1@-->|HTTP request| nginx

    subgraph webserver[Nginx Web Server]
        nginx[Nginx] e2@-->|forward request| drupal[Drupal]
    end

    drupal e3@-->|query| mariadb[(MariaDB)]
    drupal e4@-->|query| solr[(Solr)]

    mariadb e6@-.->|data| drupal
    solr e7@-.->|results| drupal
    drupal e9@-.->|HTML response| nginx
    nginx e10@-.->|HTML response| user

    class e1 flow0;
    class e2 flow1;
    class e3 flow2;
    class e4 flow2;
    class e5 flow2;
    class e6 flow3;
    class e7 flow3;
    class e8 flow3;
    class e9 flow4;
    class e10 flow5;

```


### IIIF Integration

For some [Resource Nodes] in Islandora, the HTML response may include a link to a [IIIF Manifest] that is dynamically generated by Drupal for the given node. This typically happens when rendering [Resource Nodes] that have image [media]. For these types of requests, Islandora's [IIIF] module may also query the [Cantaloupe] IIIF server for metadata needed to generate the [IIIF Manifest]. The IIIF viewer configured on the Islandora site (e.g. [OpenSeadragon] or [Mirador]) will communicate with Cantaloupe to render the image(s) included in the IIIF Manifest.

All this to say, in addition to [the typical drupal request flow](#islandora-is-a-drupal-website), Drupal may also query Cantaloupe for basic image metadata (e.g. height/width) which are needed to generate a valid [IIIF Manifest]. The client's web browser will then read that IIIF Manifest using Javascript and the IIIF viewer will `GET` the images referenced in the IIIF Manifest from [Cantaloupe].

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    user([Client / Browser])
    user e1@-->|GET IIIF Manifest| nginx

    subgraph webserver[Nginx Web Server]
        nginx[Nginx] e2@-->|forward request| drupal[Drupal]
    end

    drupal e3@-->|GET /info.json| cantaloupe[Cantaloupe IIIF Image Server]

    cantaloupe e4@-->|info.json| drupal
    drupal e5@-.->|HTML response| nginx
    nginx e6@-.->|HTML response| user
    user e7@-->|GET /image.png| cantaloupe
    cantaloupe e8@-.->|image.png| user

    class e1 flow0;
    class e2 flow1;
    class e3 flow2;
    class e4 flow3;
    class e5 flow4;
    class e6 flow5;
    class e7 flow6;
    class e8 flow7;
    class e9 flow8;

```


### Fedora Flysystem Adapter

Islandora uses [Flysystem] and the [associated Drupal module](https://www.drupal.org/project/flysystem) to store Drupal managed files in [Fedora (Repository Software)].

You can read more about this in [Islandora's Flysystem documentation](../user-documentation/flysystem/).

## Microservices

In addition to all the tools Drupal provides, Islandora extends the Drupal
site's capabilities using an event-driven architecture of [Microservices].
When a repository manager creates, updates, or deletes Drupal [entities],
Islandora records durable work in Drupal and dispatches a message through
Symfony Messenger for asynchronous processing.

There are two different types of events Islandora emits:

- [Derivative] Events - these types of events create [derivatives] from files uploaded to Islandora
- Index Events - these types of events create an indexed representation of a [Resource Node] in a system external to [Drupal]

### Derivative Events

Below is a simplified diagram of the derivative flow. Drupal queues a
derivative job, a Messenger worker receives it, and the worker invokes the
configured derivative service. By default, worker processes run in the Drupal
deployment. CPU-intensive or memory-intensive derivative work can also be
distributed to external services. See [Scaling Islandora Events](scaling.md)
for the deployment patterns and operator guidance.

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    drupal([Islandora Drupal Website])

    drupal e1@-->|queues derivative job + ledger record| messenger

    subgraph runtime[Drupal Messenger Runtime]
        messenger[Symfony Messenger + sm_ledger]
        worker[Derivative Worker]
        messenger e2@-->|worker receives derivative message| worker
    end

    subgraph microservices[scyllaridae microservices]
        fits[FITS]
        homarus[Homarus]
        houdini[Houdini]
        hypercube[Hypercube]
    end

    worker --> fits
    worker --> homarus
    worker e3@--> houdini
    worker --> hypercube

    fits -.->|derivative streamed back| worker
    homarus -.->|derivative streamed back| worker
    houdini e4@-.->|derivative streamed back| worker
    hypercube -.->|derivative streamed back| worker

    worker e5@-.->|worker saves derivative + updates ledger| drupal

    class e1 flow0;
    class e2 flow1;
    class e3 flow2;
    class e4 flow3;
    class e5 flow4;
```

### Index Events

Drupal dispatches indexing work through Symfony Messenger-backed workers that
write directly to [Blazegraph] and [Fedora (Repository Software)]. Like the
derivative flow, the worker runtime can stay in the Drupal deployment or be
scaled out by moving transport or downstream execution to separate services.
See [Scaling Islandora Events](scaling.md) for those scaling patterns.

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    drupal([Islandora Drupal Website])

    drupal e1@-->|queues index job + ledger record| messenger

    subgraph runtime[Drupal Messenger Runtime]
        messenger[Symfony Messenger + sm_ledger]
        worker[Index Worker]
        messenger e2@-->|worker receives index message| worker
    end

    fedora_indexer[Fedora indexer]
    blazegraph_indexer[Blazegraph indexer]

    worker e3@--> fedora_indexer
    worker --> blazegraph_indexer

    fedora[(Fedora)]
    fedora_indexer e4@-.->|syncs resource to| fedora

    triplestore[(Blazegraph)]
    blazegraph_indexer -.->|writes RDF to| triplestore

    worker e5@-.->|worker updates ledger| drupal

    class e1 flow0;
    class e2 flow1;
    class e3 flow2;
    class e4 flow3;
    class e5 flow4;
```

## Components

### Islandora

The following components are microservices developed and maintained by the Islandora community. They are bundled under [scyllaridae] and [Islandora Crayfish](https://github.com/Islandora/Crayfish):

* [scyllaridae]
    * [Crayfits]
    * [Homarus]
    * [Houdini]
    * [Hypercube]

### Other Open Source

The following components are deployed with Islandora, but are developed and maintained by other open source projects:

* [Apache]
    * [Tomcat]
    * [Solr]
* [Blazegraph]
* [Cantaloupe]
* [Drupal]
* [FITS]
* [Fedora (Repository Software)]
* [MariaDB] or [PostgreSQL]
* [NGINX]
* [Traefik]
* Triplestore - See [Blazegraph]
