<span id="versioning"></span>
= Versioning =

As a user of an Islandora repository, you may be wondering - Is this content being versioned? Could I restore from a previous version if I needed to? Can I see a list of versions for an object? The answer to these questions is two-fold, and largely yes. The architecture of Islandora provides users with a Drupal implementation and a Fedora implementation which are connected in Islandora.

!!! note “Islandora Software Versioning” Looking for information about versions of Islandora itself? The latest Islandora follows [https://semver.org/ semantic versioning]. Previously, Islandora’s versions were tied to the version of Drupal and numbered in order of release, such as [https://wiki.lyrasis.org/display/ISLANDORA6131/Islandora Islandora 6.x-13.1] or [https://wiki.lyrasis.org/display/ISLANDORA/Start Islandora 7.x-1.13]. [[../technical-documentation/versioning|More information]].

<span id="drupal-revisioning"></span>
== Drupal Revisioning ==

Drupal provides a concept of revisions which allows you to track the differences between multiple versions of your content and revert to older ones. The list of revisions for a node are available at http://localhost:8000/node/1/revisions. There are [https://www.drupal.org/docs/8/administering-a-drupal-8-site/node-revisions Drupal docs] on revisioning. Media objects are also versioned in Drupal but there is not a UI component for this - [https://github.com/Islandora/documentation/issues/1035 see related issue].

<span id="fedora-and-memento"></span>
== Fedora and Memento ==

Fedora implements the [http://mementoweb.org/about/ Memento] specification for versioning resources, which is a time-based HTTP framework. Fedora provides [https://wiki.lyrasis.org/display/FEDORA5x/Versioning documentation] as well as an [https://wiki.lyrasis.org/display/FEDORA5x/RESTful+HTTP+API+-+Versioning API implementation].

<span id="basic-data-flow"></span>
== Basic Data Flow ==

# A node or media object is created or updated in Drupal.
# When an entity is revisionable, and it isn’t the initial creation, it [https://github.com/Islandora/islandora/blob/8.x-1.x/src/EventGenerator/EventGenerator.php#L109 adds a flag] to the event object that gets passed to Alpaca.
# The [https://github.com/Islandora/Alpaca/tree/dev/islandora-indexing-fcrepo islandora-indexing-fcrepo module] of Alpaca looks for that flag and fires a call to the [https://github.com/Islandora/Crayfish/blob/dev/Milliner/src/app.php#L52 versioning endpoint] of [https://github.com/Islandora/Crayfish/tree/dev/Milliner Milliner].
# Milliner uses the [https://github.com/Islandora/chullo/blob/dev/src/FedoraApi.php#L320 Chullo library] to [https://github.com/Islandora/Crayfish/blob/dev/Milliner/src/Service/MillinerService.php#L551 create a version] in Fedora.
